The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Barbarians, by John Sentry

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Barbarians

Author: John Sentry

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: January 2, 2010 [EBook #30828]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BARBARIANS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _History was repeating itself; there were moats and nobles in
    Pennsylvania and vassals in Manhattan and the barbarian hordes were
    overrunning the land._


The Barbarians

BY JOHN SENTRY


It was just as he saw The Barbarian's squat black tankette lurch
hurriedly into a nest of boulders that young Giulion Geoffrey realized
he had been betrayed. With the muzzle of his own cannon still hot from
the shell that had jammed The Barbarian's turret, he had yanked the
starboard track lever to wheel into position for the finishing shot. All
around him, the remnants of The Barbarian's invading army were being cut
to flaming ribbons by the armored vehicles of the Seaboard League. The
night was shot through by billows of cannon fire, and the din of
laboring engines, guns, and rent metal was a cacophonic climax to the
Seaboard League's first decisive victory over the inland invaders. Young
Geoffrey could justifiably feel that he would cap that climax by
personally accounting for the greatest of the inland barbarians; the
barbarian general himself. He trained his sights on the scarlet bearpaw
painted on the skewed turret's flank, and laid his hand on the firing
lever.

Out of the corner of his eye, he caught a glimpse of another tankette
rushing up on his port side. He glanced at it, saw its graceful
handcrafting, and knew it for one of the League's own. He could even see
the insigne; the mailed heel trampling a stand of wheat; Harolde Dugald,
of the neighboring fief. Geoffrey was on coldly polite terms with
Dugald--he had no use for the other man's way of treating his serfs--and
now he felt a prickle of indignant rage at this attempt to usurp a
share of his glory. He saw Dugald's turret begin to traverse, and
hastily tried to get the finishing shot into The Barbarian's tankette
before the other Leaguesman could fire. But Dugald was not aiming for
The Barbarian. First he had to eliminate Geoffrey from the scene
entirely. When he fired, at almost point-blank range, the world seemed
to explode in Giulion's eyes.

[Illustration: _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_]

Somehow, no whistling shard of metal actually hit him. But the tankette,
sturdy as it was, could not hope to protect him entirely. He was thrown
viciously into the air, his ribs first smashing into the side of the
hatch, and then he was thrown clear, onto the rocky ground of the
foothills; agonized, stunned to semi-consciousness, he lay feebly
beating at his smoldering tunic while Dugald spun viciously by him,
almost crushing him under one tread. He saw Dugald's tankette plunge
into the rocks after The Barbarian, and then, suddenly, the battle was
beyond him. Dugald, The Barbarian; all the thundering might that had
clashed here on the eastern seaboard of what had, long ago, been The
United States of America--all of this had suddenly, as battles will,
whirled off in a new direction and left Giulion Geoffrey to lie hurt and
unconscious in the night.

       *       *       *

He awoke to the trickle of cold water between his teeth. His lips bit
into the threaded metal of a canteen top, and a huge arm supported his
shoulders. Broad shoulders and a massive head loomed over him against
the stars. A rumbling, gentle voice said: "All right, lad, now swallow
some before it's all wasted."

He peered around him in the night. It was as still as the bottom of a
grave. Nothing moved. He drew a ragged breath that ended in a sharp
gasp, and the rumbling voice said: "Ribs?"

He nodded and managed a strangled "Yes."

"Shouldn't wonder," the stranger grunted. "I saw you pop out of your
tank like a cork coming out of a wine bottle. That was a fair shot he
hit you. You're lucky." A broad hand pressed him down as the memory of
Dugald's treachery started him struggling to his feet. "Hold still, lad.
We'll give you a chance to catch your breath and wrap some bandages
around you. You'll live to give him his due, but not tonight. You'll
have to wait for another day."

There was something in the stranger's voice that Geoffrey recognized for
the quality that made men obey other men. It was competence,
self-assurance, and, even more, the calm expression of good sense.
Tonight, Geoffrey needed someone with that quality. He sank back,
grateful for the stranger's help. "I'm Giulion Geoffrey of Geoffrion,"
he said, "and indebted to you. Who are you, stranger?"

The darkness rumbled to a deep, rueful laugh. "In these parts, lad, I'm
not called by my proper name. I'm Hodd Savage--The Barbarian. And that
was a fair knock _you_ gave _me_."

Young Geoffrey's silence lasted for a long while. Then he said in a
flat, distant voice: "Why did you give me water, if you're going to kill
me anyway?"

The Barbarian laughed again, this time in pure amusement. "Because I'm
not going to kill you, obviously. You're too good a cannoneer to be
despatched by a belt knife. No--no, lad, I'm not planning to kill anyone
for some time. All I want right now is to get out of here and get home.
I've got another army to raise, to make up for this pasting you
Leaguesmen have just given me."

"Next time, you won't be so lucky," Geoffrey muttered. "We'll see your
hide flapping in the rain, if you're ever foolish enough to raid our
lands again."

The Barbarian slapped his thigh. "By God," he chuckled, "I knew it
wasn't some ordinary veal-fed princeling that outmaneuvered _me_!" He
shook his head. "That other pup had better watch out for you, if you
ever cross his path again. I lost him in the rocks with ease to spare.
Bad luck your shot smashed my fuel tanks, or I'd be halfway home by
now." The rolling voice grew low and bitter. "No sense waiting to pick
up my men. Not enough of 'em left to make a corporal's guard."

"What do you mean, _if_ I ever cross Dugald's path again? I'll have him
called out to trial by combat the day I can ride a tankette once more."

"I wouldn't be too sure, lad," The Barbarian said gently. "What does
that look like, over there?"

Geoffrey turned his head to follow the shadowy pointing arm, and saw a
flicker of light in the distance. He recognized it for what it was; a
huge campfire, with the Leaguesmen's tankettes drawn up around it.
"They're dividing the spoils--what prisoners there are, to work the
mills; whatever of your equipment is still usable; your baggage train.
And so forth. What of it?"

"Ah, yes, my baggage train," The Barbarian muttered. "Well, we'll come
back to that. What else do you suppose they're dividing?"

Geoffrey frowned. "Why--nothing else. Wait!" He sat up sharply, ignoring
his ribs. "The fiefs of the dead nobles."

"Exactly. Your ramshackle little League held together long enough to
whip us for the first time, but now the princelings are dividing up and
returning to their separate holdings. Once there, they'll go back to
peering covetously at each other's lands, and maybe raid amongst
themselves a little, until I come back again. And you're as poor as a
church mouse at this moment, lad--no fief, no lands, no title--unless
there's an heir?"

Geoffrey shook his head distractedly. "No. I've not wed. It's as you
say."

"And just try to get your property back. No--no, it won't be so easy to
return. Unless you'd care to be a serf on your own former holding?"

"Dugald would have me killed," Geoffrey said bitterly.

"So there you are, lad. The only advantage you have is that Dugald
thinks you're dead already--you can be sure of that, or it would have
been an assassin, and not me, that woke you. That's something, at least.
It's a beginning, but you'll have to lay your plans carefully, and take
your time. I certainly wouldn't plan on doing anything until your body's
healed and your brain's had time to work."

Young Geoffrey blinked back the tears of rage. The thought of losing the
town and lands his father had left him was almost more than his hot
blood could stand. The memory of the great old Keep that dominated the
town, with its tapestried halls and torchlit chambers, was suddenly very
precious to him. He felt a sharp pang at the thought that he must sleep
in a field tonight, like some skulking outlaw, while Dugald quite
possibly got himself drunk on Geoffrion wine and snored his headache
away on the thick furs of Geoffrey's bed.

But The Barbarian was right. Time was needed--and this meant that, to a
certain extent at least, his lot and Savage's were thrown in together.
The thought came to Geoffrey that he might have chosen a worse partner.

"Now, lad," The Barbarian said, "as long as you're not doing anything
else, you might as well help me with my problem."

The realization of just exactly who this man was came sharply back to
young Geoffrey. "I won't help you escape to your own lands, if that's
what you mean," he said quickly.

"I'll take good care of that myself, when the time comes," the man
answered drily. "Right now, I've got something else in mind. They're
dividing my baggage train, as you said. Now, I don't mind that, seeing
as most of it belonged to them in the first place. I don't mind it for
this year, that is. But there's something else one of you cockerels will
be wanting to take home with him, and I've a mind not to let him.
There's a perfectly good woman in my personal trailer, and I'm going to
get her. But if we're going to do that and get clear of this country by
morning, we'd better get to it."

Like every other young man of his time and place, Geoffrey had a
clear-cut sense of duty regarding the safety and well-being of ladies.
He had an entirely different set of attitudes toward women who were not
ladies. He had not the slightest idea of which to apply to this case.

What sort of woman would The Barbarian take to battle with him? What
sort of women would the inland barbarians have generally? He had very
little knowledge to go on. The inlanders had been appearing from over
the westward mountains for generations, looting and pillaging almost at
will, sometimes staying through a winter but usually disappearing in the
early Fall, carrying their spoils back to their mysterious homelands on
the great Mississippi plain. The seaboard civilization had somehow kept
from going to its knees, in spite of them--in this last generation, even
though the barbarians had The Barbarian to lead them, the Seaboard
League had managed to cobble itself together--but no one, in all this
time, had ever actually learned, or cared, much about these vicious,
compactly organized raiders. Certainly no one had learned anything
beyond those facts which worked to best advantage on a battlefield.

So, young Giulion Geoffrey faced his problem. This 'perfectly good
woman' of The Barbarian's--was she in fact a good woman, a lady, and
therefore entitled to aid in extremity from any and all gentlemen; or
was she some camp follower, entirely worthy of being considered a spoil
of combat?

"Well, come on, lad," The Barbarian rumbled impatiently at this point.
"Do you want that Dugald enjoying _her_ tonight along with everything
else?"

And that decided Geoffrey. He pushed himself to his feet, not liking the
daggers in his chest, but not liking the thought of Dugald's pleasures
even more. "Let's go, then."

"Good enough, lad," The Barbarian chuckled. "Now let's see how quietly
we can get across to the edge of that fire."

They set out--none too quietly, with The Barbarian's heavy bulk lurching
against Geoffrey's lean shoulder on occasion, and both of them uncertain
of their footing in the darkness. But they made it across without being
noticed--just two more battle-sore figures in a field where many such
might be expected--and that was what counted.

The noise and confusion attendant on the dividing of the spoils was an
added help; they reached the fringes of the campfire easily.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was very interesting, the way history had doubled back on itself,
like a worm re-growing part of its body but re-growing it in the wrong
place. At one end of the kink--of the fresh, pink scar--was a purulent
hell of fire and smoke that no one might have expected to live through.
Yet, people had, as they have a habit of doing. And at the other end of
the kink in time--Giulion Geoffrey's end, Harolde Dugald's time, The
Barbarian's day--there were keeps and moats in Erie, Pennsylvania,
vassals in New Brunswick, and a great stinking warren of low,
half-timbered houses on the island of Manhattan. If it had taken a few
centuries longer to recover from the cauterizing sun bombs, these things
might still have been. But they might have had different names, and
human history might have been considered to begin only a few hundred
years before. Even this had not happened. The link with the past
remained. There was a narrow, cobbled path on Manhattan, with sewage
oozing down the ditch in its center, which was still Fifth Avenue. It
ran roughly along the same directions as old Broadway, not because there
was no one who could read the yellowed old maps but because surveying
was in its second childhood. There was a barge running between two ropes
stretched across the Hudson, and this was The George Washington Bridge
ferry. So, it was only a kink in history, not a break.

But Rome was not re-built in a day. Hodd Savage--The Barbarian, the man
who had come out of the hinterlands to batter on civilization's badly
mortared walls--clamped his hand on Giulion Geoffrey's arm, grunted,
jerked his head toward the cluster of nobles standing beside the
campfire, and muttered: "Listen."

Geoffrey listened.

The nobles were between him and the fire, and almost none of them were
more than silhouettes. Here and there, a man faced toward the fire at
such an angle that Geoffrey could make out the thick arch of an eyebrow,
the jut of a cheek, or the crook of a nose. But it was not enough for
recognition. All the nobles were dressed in battle accoutrements that
had become stained or torn. Their harness had shifted, their tunics were
askew, and they were bunched so closely that the outline of one man
blended into the mis-shaped shadow of the next. The voices were hoarse
from an afternoon's bellowing. Some were still drunk with the acid fire
of exhausted nerves, and were loud. Others, drained, mumbled in the
background like a chorus of the stupid. Gesticulating, mumbling,
shouting, shadowed, lumped into one knot of blackness lighted by a ruddy
cheekbone here, a gleaming brow there above an eye socket as inky and
blank as a bottomless pit, they were like something out of the wan and
misty ages before the Earth had had time to form completely.

Two arguing voices rose out of the mass:

"Those three barbarian tankettes are _mine_, I say!"

"Yours when I lie dead!"

"They surrendered to me!"

"Because I pounded them into submission."

"Into submission, indeed! You skulked around their flanks like a lame
dog, and now that I've taken them, you want your bone!"

"You were glad enough to see me there when the battle was hot. Call me a
dog again and I'll spit you like a rat on a pitchfork."

No one else in the group of nobles paid the two of them any attention.
No one had time to spare for any quarrel but his own, and the whole
squabbling pile of them looked ready to fly apart at any moment--to draw
sidearms and knives and flare into spiteful combat.

The Barbarian spat quietly. "There's your Seaboard League, lad. There's
your convocation of free men. Step out there and ask for your lands
back. Care to try?"

"We've already decided that wouldn't be wise," Geoffrey said irritably.
He had never cared much for these inevitable aftermaths to battle, but
it made him angry to have an inland barbarian make pointed comments. "I
suppose it's different when _you_ win, eh?"

"Not very. But then, we're not civilized. Let's get moving, lad."

Silently, they skirted the fire and made their way toward the parked
vehicles of The Barbarian's captured supply train. The ground was rough
and covered by underbrush. More than once, The Barbarian stumbled into
Geoffrey, making him clench his jaw against the pain in his chest. But
he saw no point in saying anything about it.

"There she is," The Barbarian said in a husky growl. Geoffrey peered
through the brush at an armored trailer whose flat sides were completely
undecorated except for a scarlet bearpaw painted on the door. A lantern
gleamed behind the slit windows, and The Barbarian grunted with
satisfaction. "She's still in there. Fine. We'll have this done in a
couple of seconds."

In spite of the incongruity, Geoffrey asked curiously: "What's a
second?"

"A division of time, lad--one sixtieth of a minute."

"Oh. What on Earth would you want to measure that accurately for?"

"For getting women out of trailers in a hurry, lad. Now--let's look for
sentries."

       *       *       *

There were two guarding the trailer--men-at-arms from Dugald's holding,
Geoffrey noticed--carrying shotguns and lounging in the shadows. One of
them had a wineskin--Geoffrey heard the gurgle plainly--and the other
was constantly turning away from the trailer to listen to the shrieks
and shouting coming from among the other vehicles of the train, where
other guards were not being quite as careful of their masters' new
property.

"I see they've found the quartermaster's waggons," The Barbarian said
drily. "Now, then, lad--you work away toward the right, there, and I'll
take the left. Here--take my knife. I won't need it." The Barbarian
passed over a length of steel as big as a short-sword, but oddly curved
and sharpened down one side of the blade. "Stab if you can, but if you
have to cut, that blade'll go through a man's forearm. Remember you're
not holding one of those overgrown daggers of yours."

"And just why should I kill a man for you?"

"Do you think that man won't try to kill you?"

Geoffrey had no satisfactory answer to that. He moved abruptly off into
the brush, holding The Barbarian's knife, and wondering just how far he
was obligated for a bandaged chest and half a pint of water. But a man's
duty to his rescuer was plain enough, and, besides, just what else was
there to do?

The blame for it all went squarely back to Dugald, and Geoffrey did not
love him for it. He slipped through the bushes until he was only a few
yards from the man who had the wineskin, and waited for The Barbarian to
appear at the opposite end of the trailer.

When it happened, it happened quite suddenly, as these things will. One
moment the other sentry was craning his neck for another look at what
was going on elsewhere. The next he was down on his knees, croaking
through a compressed throat, with The Barbarian's arm under his chin and
a driving knee ready to smash at the back of his neck again.

Geoffrey jumped forward, toward his own man. The man-at-arms had dropped
his wineskin in surprise and was staring at what was happening to his
comrade. When he heard Geoffrey come out of the underbrush, the face he
turned was white and oddly distended with shock, as though all the bones
had drained out of it. He might have appeared fierce enough, ordinarily.
But things were happening too fast for him.

Geoffrey had never killed anyone but a noble in his life. Not
intentionally and at close range, in any case. The completely baffled
and helpless look of this one somehow found time to remind him that this
was not, after all, one of his peers--that the man was hopelessly
outclassed in fair combat--or in anything else, for that matter.
Geoffrey did _not_ stop to weigh the probity of this idea. It was the
central tenet of his education and environment. Furthermore, there was
some truth in it.

He couldn't kill the man. He swept up his arm and struck the flat of The
Barbarian's broad knife against the side of the guard's head, and bowled
the man over with his rush. But the guard had a hard skull. He stared up
with glazed but conscious eyes, and squalled: "Lord Geoffrey!" Geoffrey
hit him again, and this time the guard stayed down, but the damage was
done. Scrambling to his feet, Geoffrey ran over to The Barbarian, who
was letting the other guard ooze to the ground.

"We'll have to hurry!" Geoffrey panted. "Before that man comes back to
his senses."

The Barbarian gave him a disgusted look, but nodded. "Hurry we shall."
He lurched to the trailer door and slapped it with the flat of his hand.
"Let's go, Myka."

There was a scrambling sound inside the trailer, and the light went out.
The door slid open, and Geoffrey found himself staring at the most
beautiful woman he had ever seen.

She was lithe almost to the point of boyishness, even though she was
clearly some years older than Geoffrey. She had short hair the color of
hammered copper, high cheekbones, and tawny eyes. She was wearing a
tunic and short trousers, and there was an empty pistol holster strapped
around her waist. Obviously, she was not a lady. But it was much too
late for Geoffrey to care about that. She stopped in the doorway,
shaking her head slowly at The Barbarian. "I swear, Hodd," she said in a
low, laughing voice, "one of these days you _won't_ come back from the
dead, and I'll be surprised."

"It was close enough, this time," The Barbarian growled. He jerked his
head toward Geoffrey. "That young buck over there knows how to handle
his enemies. Once he learns what to do about his friends, I may have to
retire."

Myka arched her burning eyebrows. "Oh? What's the story behind that, I'd
like to know."

"We can always talk," Geoffrey said a little edgily. "But we can't
always find an empty tankette."

"Quite right, lad," The Barbarian said. "I saw some vehicles parked over
that way."

"Those belong to the nobles. There ought to be some captured ones of
yours somewhere around here."

"With plenty of guards on them. No, thanks."

"That didn't trouble you earlier."

"Myka, as you may have noticed, is more than a tank. This time the prize
isn't worth it. I'd rather just slip over to where I can get
transportation for the choosing."

"Not with my help."

The Barbarian looked at him and grunted. He seemed oddly disappointed.
"I would have bet the other way," he muttered. Then the shaggy head
rose, and he circled Myka's waist with one arm. "All right, I'll do it
without your help."

"Is Myka trained to drive a tankette and fight at the same time?"

"No."

"Then you'd better do it my way. You'd make a poor showing, kicking
drive levers with a broken leg." Geoffrey nodded toward The Barbarian's
right shin. "It's been that way since before you picked me up, hasn't
it? I saw it wobble when you kneed that man-at-arms."

Myka looked at The Barbarian sharply, worry on her face, but the man was
chuckling. "All right, bucko, we'll do it your way."

"Fine." Geoffrey wasn't so sure it was. Suddenly he was committed not
only to helping The Barbarian escape, but also to escape with him. He
was faintly surprised at himself. But there was something about the man.
Something worth saving, no matter what. And there was the business now
of having been recognized. Once Dugald learned he was still alive, there
would be a considerable amount of danger in staying in the vicinity. Of
course, he had only to stoop over the unconscious guard with The
Barbarian's knife....

With a quick motion, he tossed the weapon back to its owner.

_That_ one was an easy choice, Geoffrey thought. Simply stealing--or was
it recapturing?--a tankette and using it to drive away with Myka and The
Barbarian didn't mean he had to go all the way to the barbarian lands
with them. Let the guard revive and run to Dugald with the news. All
Geoffrey had to do was to remove himself a few miles, find shelter, and
bide his time.

One recaptured barbarian tankette might not even be missed. And the
guard might not be believed--well, that was a thin hope--but, in any
case, no one had any reason to suspect The Barbarian was still alive.
There'd be no general pursuit.

Well ... maybe not. There was a man-at-arms choked to death, by a
stronger arm than Geoffrey's, and it was The Barbarian's woman who would
be missing. There might be quite a buzz about that.

Geoffrey shook his head in impatient annoyance. This kind of life
demanded a great deal more thinking than he was accustomed to. All these
unpredictable factors made a man's head spin.

And then again, maybe they didn't. The thing to do was to act, to do
what would get him out of here now, and leave him free tomorrow to do
whatever thinking tomorrow demanded. With a little practice, too,
thinking would undoubtedly come more easily.

"All right," he said decisively, "let's get moving over in that
direction, and see if the guards haven't gotten a little careless." He
motioned to Myka and The Barbarian, and began to lead the way into the
underbrush. He thrust out a hand to pull a sapling aside, and almost ran
full-tilt into Harolde Dugald.

       *       *       *

Dugald was almost exactly Geoffrey's age and size, but he had something
Geoffrey lacked--a thin-lipped look of wolfish wisdom. His dark eyes
were habitually slitted, and his mouth oddly off-center, always poised
between a mirthless grin and a snarl. His long black hair curled under
at the base of his skull, and his hands were covered with heavy gold and
silver rings. There was one for each finger and thumb, and all of them
were set with knobby precious stones.

His lips parted now, and his long white teeth showed plainly in the
semi-darkness. "I was coming back to inspect my prizes," he said in a
voice like a fine-bladed saw chuckling through soft metal. "And look
what I've found." The open mouth of his heavy, handmade side pistol
pointed steadily between Geoffrey's eyes. "I find my erstwhile neighbor
risen from the dead, and in the company of a crippled enemy and his
leman. Indeed, my day is complete."

The one thing Geoffrey was not feeling was fear. The wire-thin strand of
his accumulated rage was stretched to breaking. Somewhere, far from the
forefront of his mind, he was feeling surprise and disappointment. He
was perfectly aware of Dugald's weapon, and of what it would do to his
head at this range. But Geoffrey was not stopping to think. And Dugald
was a bit closer to him than he ought to have been.

Geoffrey's hands seemed to leap out. One tore the pistol out of Dugald's
hand and knocked it spinning. The other cracked, open-palmed, against
the other man's face, hard enough to split flesh and start the blood
trickling down Dugald's cheek. The force of the combined blows sent
Dugald staggering. He fell back, crashing into a bush, and hung against
it. Stark fear shone in his eyes. He screamed: "Dugald! _Dugald!_ To me!
To me!"

For a second, everything went silent; nobles quarreling, guards
roistering among the captures--suddenly the battlefield was still. Then
the reaction to the rallying cry set off an entirely different kind of
hubbub. The sound now was that of an alerted pack of dogs.

Once more, Geoffrey swept his hand across Dugald's face, feeling his own
skin break over the knuckles. But there was no time for anything else.
Now they had to run, and not in silence. Now everything went by the
board, and the nearest safety was the best. Behind them as they tore
through the brush, they could hear Dugald shouting:

"That way! The Barbarian's with him!" The Barbarian was grunting with
every step. Myka was panting. Geoffrey was in the lead, his throat
burning with every breath, not knowing where he was leading them, but
trying to skirt around the pack of nobles that would be running toward
them in the darkness.

He crashed against plated metal. He peered at it in the absolute
darkness this far from the fires and torches. "Tankette!" he said
hoarsely. "Empty." They scrambled onto it, Geoffrey pulling at The
Barbarian's arm. "Down, Myka--inside. Ought to be room between steering
posts and motor." He pushed the woman down through the hatch, and
dropped back to the ground. He ran to the crank clipped to one track
housing and thrust it into place. "You--you'll have to hang
onto--turret," he panted to The Barbarian. "Help me start." He wound
furiously at the starting crank until he felt the flywheel spin free of
the ratchet, and then engaged the driveshaft. The tankette shuddered to
the sudden torque. The motor resisted, turned its shaft reluctantly,
spun the magneto, ignited, stuttered, coughed, and began to roar. The
headlights flickered yellowly, glowed up to brightness as the engine
built up revolutions. The Barbarian, clinging to the turret with one
arm, pushed the choke control back to halfway and advanced the spark.
Geoffrey scrambled up the sharply pitched rear deck, clawing for
handholds on the radiator tubing, and dropped into the turret seat. He
took the controls, kicked at the left side track control without caring,
for the moment, whether Myka was in the way or not, spun the tankette
halfway round, and pulled the throttle out as far as it would go. Its
engine clamoring, its rigid tracks transmitting every shock and
battering them, the tankette flogged forward through the brush. There
was gunfire booming behind them, and there were other motors sputtering
into life.

There was no one among the nobles to drive as well as Geoffrey
could--certainly no one who could keep up with him at night, in country
he knew. He could probably depend on that much.

He lit the carbide lamp over the panel.

Geoffrey looked at the crest worked into the metal, and laughed. He had
even managed to steal Dugald's tankette.

       *       *       *       *       *

By morning, they were a good fifty miles away from where the battle had
been fought. They were almost as far as the Delaware River, and the
ground was broken into low hills, each a little higher than the last.
Geoffrey had only been this far away from his home a few times, before
his father's death, and then never in this direction. Civilization was
not considered to extend this far inland. When a young man went on his
travels, preparatory for the day when he inherited his father's holdings
and settled down to maintain them, he went along the coast, perhaps as
far as Philadelphia or Hartford.

Geoffrey had always had a lively interest in strange surroundings. He
had regretted the day his journeyings came to an end--not that he
hadn't regretted his father's passing even more. Now, as dawn came up
behind them, he could not help turning his head from side to side and
looking at the strangely humped land, seeing for the first time a
horizon which was not flat. He found himself intrigued by the thought
that he had no way of knowing what lay beyond the next hill--that he
would have to travel, and keep traveling, to satisfy a perpetually
renewed curiosity.

All this occupied one part of his mind. Simultaneously, he wondered how
much farther they'd travel in this vehicle. The huge sixteen-cylinder
in-line engine was by now delivering about one-fourth of its rated fifty
horsepower, with a good half of its spark plugs hopelessly fouled and
the carburetor choked by the dust of yesterday's battle.

They were very low on shot and powder charges for the two-pounder turret
cannon, as well. The tankette had of course never been serviced after
the battle. There was one good thing--neither had their pursuers'.
Looking back, Geoffrey could see no sign of them. But he could also see
the plain imprint of the tankette's steel cleats stretched out behind
them in a betraying line. The rigid, unsprung track left its mark on
hard stone as easily as it did in soft earth. The wonder was that the
tracks had not quite worn themselves out as yet, though all the rivets
were badly strained and the tankette sounded like a barrel of stones
tumbling downhill.

The Barbarian had spent the night with one arm thrown over the cannon
barrel and the fingers of his other hand hooked over the edge of the
turret hatch. In spite of the tankette's vicious jouncing, he had not
moved or changed his position. Now he raised one hand to comb the shaggy
hair away from his forehead, and there were faint bloody marks on the
hatch.

"How much farther until we're over the mountains?" Geoffrey asked him.

"Over the--lad, we haven't even come to the beginning of them yet."

Geoffrey grimaced. "Then we'll never make it. Not in this vehicle."

"I didn't expect to. We'll walk until we reach the pass. I've got a
support camp set up there."

"Walk? This is impossible country for people on foot. There are
intransigent tribesmen all through this territory."

"How do you know?"

"How do I _know_? Why, everybody knows about them!"

The Barbarian looked at him thoughtfully, and with just the faintest
trace of amusement. "Well, if _everybody_ knows they're intransigent, I
guess they are. I guess we'll just have to hope they don't spot us."

Geoffrey was a little nettled by The Barbarian's manner. It wasn't,
after all, as if anybody claimed there were dragons or monsters or any
other such oceanic thing living here. This was good, solid fact--people
had actually come up here, tried to bring civilization to the tribes,
and failed completely. They were, by all reports, hairy, dirty people
equipped with accurate rifles. No one had bothered to press the issue,
because obviously it was hardly worth it. Geoffrey had expected to have
trouble with them--but he had expected to meet it in an armored vehicle.
But now that the mountains had turned out to be so far away, the
situation might grow quite serious. And The Barbarian didn't seem to
care very much.

"Well, now, lad," he was saying, "if the tribesmen're that bad, maybe
your friends the nobles won't dare follow us up here."

"They'll follow us," Geoffrey answered flatly. "I slapped Dugald's
face."

"Oh. Oh, I didn't understand that. Code of honor--that sort of thing.
All the civilized appurtenances."

"It's hardly funny."

"No, I suppose not. I don't suppose it occurred to you to kill him on
the spot?"

"Kill a _noble_ in hot blood?"

"Sorry. Code of honor again. Forget I mentioned it."

Geoffrey rankled under The Barbarian's barely concealed amusement. To
avoid any more of this kind of thing, he pointedly turned and looked at
the terrain behind them--something he ought to have done a little
earlier. Three tankettes were in sight, only a few miles behind them,
laboring down the slope of a hill.

And at that moment, as though rivetted iron had a dramatic sense of its
own, their tankette coughed, spun lazily on one track as the crankshaft
paused with a cam squarely between positions, and burned up the last
drops of oil and alcohol in its fuel tank.

       *       *       *

Geoffrey and Myka crouched down in a brushy hollow. The Barbarian had
crawled up to the lip of the depression, and was peering through a clump
of weeds at the oncoming trio. "That seems to be all of them," he said
with a turn of his head. "It's possible they kept their speed down and
nursed themselves along to save fuel. They might even have a fuel waggon
coming up behind them. That's the way I'd do it. It would mean these
three are all we can expect for a few hours, anyway, but that they'll be
heavily reinforced some time later."

"That will hardly matter," Geoffrey muttered. Myka had found Dugald's
personal rifle inside the tankette. Geoffrey was rolling cartridges
quickly and expertly, using torn up charges from the turret cannon. He
had made the choice between a round or two for the now immobile heavy
weapon and a plentiful supply for the rifle, and would have been greatly
surprised at anyone's choosing differently. The Barbarian had not even
questioned it, and Myka was skillfully casting bullets with the help of
the hissing alcohol stove and the bullet mold included in the rifle kit.
There was plenty of finely ground priming powder, and even though
Geoffrey was neither weighing the charges of cannon powder nor measuring
the diameter of the cartridges he was rolling, no young noble of any
pretensions whatsoever could not have done the same.

The rub lay in the fact that none of this was liable to do them much
good. If they were to flee through the woods, there would certainly be
time for only a shot or two when the tribesmen found them. If the rifle
was to be used against the three nobles, then it was necessary, in all
decency, to wait until the nobles had stopped, climbed out of their
tankettes, equipped themselves equally, and a mutual ground of battle
had been agreed upon. In that case, three against one would make short
work of it.

The better chance lay with the woods and the tribesmen. It was the
better chance, but Geoffrey did not relish it. He scowled as he dropped
a primer charge down the rifle's barrel, followed it with a cartridge,
took a cooled bullet from Myka, and tamped it down with the ramrod until
it was firmly gripped by the collar on the cartridge. He took a square
of clean flannel from its compartment in the butt and carefully wiped
the lenses of the telescopic sight.

"Can I stop now?" Myka asked.

Geoffrey looked at her sharply. It had never occurred to him that the
woman might simply be humoring him, and yet that was the tone her voice
had taken. Truth to tell, he had simply handed her the stove, pig lead,
and mold, and told her to go to work.

He looked at her now, remembering that he'd been hurried and possibly
brusque. It ought not to matter--though it did--since she was hardly a
lady entitled to courtesy. She hardly looked like anything, after hours
crouched inside the tankette.

Her copper hair was smeared with grease, disarranged, and even singed
where she had presumably leaned against a hot fitting. Her clothes were
indescribably dirty and limp with perspiration. She was quite pale, and
seemed to be fighting nausea--hardly surprising, with the exhaust fumes
that must have been present in the compartment.

Nevertheless, her hair glinted where the sun struck it, and her
litheness was only accented by the wrinkled clothing. Over-accented,
Geoffrey thought to himself as he looked at the length of limb revealed
by her short trousers.

He flushed. "Of course. Thank you." He looked at the pile of finished
bullets. There were enough of them to stand off an army, provided only
the army did not shift about behind rocks and trees as the tribesmen
did, or was not equally armed, as the nobles would be. Yet, a man had to
try to the end. "You don't expect this to do much good," he said to the
woman.

Myka grinned at him. "Do you?"

"No, frankly. But why did you help me?"

"To keep you busy."

"I see." He didn't. He scooped the bullets up, put them in one pocket,
and dropped the cartridges in another. He stood up.

"There wasn't any point in letting you get nervous," Myka explained.
"You can be quite a deadly boy in action, if what I've seen and heard
about you is any indication. I didn't want you killing any of our
friends." She was smiling at him without any malice whatsoever; rather,
with a definite degree of fondness. Geoffrey did not even feel resentful
at this business of being casually managed, as though he were liable to
do something foolish.

But he scrambled up to a place beside The Barbarian in a burst of tense
movement, and looked out toward the approaching tankettes. What Myka had
just said to him, and the cryptic smile on The Barbarian's face, and a
thought of Geoffrey's own, had all fitted themselves together in his
mind.

There was no reason, really, to believe that barbarians would be hostile
to barbarians, and certainly the inland raiders could not have returned
year after year without _some_ means of handling the mountain tribes.
Friendship, or at least an alliance, would be the easiest way.

And out on the slope of the nearest hill, bearded men in homespun
clothing were rolling boulders down on the advancing tankettes.

The slope of the hill was quite steep, and the boulders were massive.
They tumbled and bounded with a speed that must have seemed terrifying
from below. Tearing great chunks out of the earth, they rumbled down on
the tankettes while the tribesmen yelled with bloodcurdling ferocity and
fired on the tankettes with impossible rapidity. With respectable
marksmanship, too. The nobles were swerving their vehicles frantically
from side to side, trying to avoid the boulders, but their ability to do
so was being destroyed by bullets that ricocheted viciously off the
canted forepeak plating. All three of them were blundering about like
cattle attacked by stinging insects. Only the lead tankette was still
under anything like intelligent control. It lurched away from three
boulders in succession, swinging on its treads and continuing to churn
its way up the hillside.

Geoffrey saw the other two tankettes struck almost simultaneously. One
took a boulder squarely between its tracks, and stopped in a shower of
rock fragments. The track cleats bit futilely at the ground. The vehicle
stalled, the boulder jammed against it. The impact did not seem to have
been particularly severe; but the entire body of the tankette had been
buckled and accordioned. Possibly only the boulder's own bulk between
the tracks had kept them from coming together like the knees of a gored
ox. It was impossible to tell where, in that crushed bulk, the turret
and its occupant might be.

The other tankette took its boulder squarely in the flank. It began to
roll over immediately, hurtling back down the hill, its driver half in
and half out of its turret at the beginning of the first roll. Tankette
and boulder came to rest together at the bottom of the hill, the stone
nosing up against the metal.

Geoffrey looked at the scene with cold fury. "That's no fitting way for
a noble to die!"

The Barbarian, who was sprawled out and watching calmly, nodded his
head. "Probably not," he said dispassionately. "But that other man's
giving a good account of himself."

The remaining tankette was almost in among the tribesmen. It had passed
the point where a rolling boulder's momentum would be great enough to do
much damage. As Geoffrey watched, the man in the turret yanked his
lanyard, and a solid shot boomed through the straggled line of bearded
men. If it had been grape or canister, it might have done a good deal of
damage. But the cannon had been loaded with Geoffrey's tankette in mind,
and the tribesmen only jeered. One of them dashed forward, under the
cannon's smoking muzzle, and jammed a wedge-shaped stone between the
left side track and the massive forward track roller. The track jammed,
broke, and whipped back in whistling fragments. The tankette slewed
around while the unharmed tribesman danced out of the way. The noble in
the turret could only watch helplessly. Apparently he had no sidearm.
Geoffrey peered at him as the tribesmen swarmed over the tankette and
dragged him out of the turret. It was Dugald, and Geoffrey's arm still
tingled from the slap that had knocked the pistol irretrievably into the
night-shadowed brush at the battlefield.

"What are they going to do to him?" he asked The Barbarian.

"Make him meet the test of fitness, I suppose."

"Fitness?"

Geoffrey did not get the answer to his question immediately. The woods
all around him were stirring, and bearded men in homespun, carrying
fantastic rifles, were casually walking toward him. The Barbarian pushed
himself up to his feet without any show of surprise.

"Howdy," he said. "Figured you were right around."

One of the tribesmen--a gaunt, incredibly tall man with a grizzled
beard--nodded. "I seen you makin' signs while you was hangin' off that
tank, before. Got a mark?"

The Barbarian extended his right arm and turned his wrist over. A faint
double scar, crossed at right angles, showed in the skin.

The tribesman peered at it and grunted. "Old one."

"I got it twenty years ago, when I first came through here," The
Barbarian answered.

"Double, too. Ain't many of those."

"My name's Hodd Savage."

"Oh," the tribesman said. His entire manner changed. Without becoming
servile, it was respectful. He extended his hand. "Sime Weatherby." He
and The Barbarian clasped hands. "That your woman down there?" the
tribesman asked, nodding toward Myka.

"That's right."

"Good enough." For the first time, Weatherby looked directly at
Geoffrey. "What about him?"

The Barbarian shook his head. "No mark."

The tribesman nodded. "I figured, from the way he was actin'." He seemed
to make no particular signal--perhaps none was needed--but Geoffrey's
arms were suddenly taken from behind, and his wrists were tied.

"We'll see if he can get him a mark today," Weatherby said. He looked to
his left, where other men were just pushing Dugald into the ring they
had formed around the group. "Seein' as there's two of them, one of 'em
ought to make it."

Geoffrey and Dugald stared expressionlessly at each other. The Barbarian
kept his eyes on Geoffrey's face. "That's right," he said. "Can't have
two men fight to the death without one of them coming out alive,
usually."

       *       *       *       *       *

The tribesmen lived in wooden cabins tucked away among trees and hidden
in narrow little valleys. Geoffrey was surprised to see windmills, and
wire fencing for the cattle pastures that adjoined their homes. He was
even more interested in their rifles, which, the tribesmen told him,
were repeaters. He was puzzled by the absence of a cylinder, such as
could be found on the generally unreliable revolvers one saw
occasionally.

The tribesmen were treating both him and Dugald with a complete absence
of the savagery he expected. They were being perfectly matter-of-fact.
If his hands had not been tied, Geoffrey might not have been a prisoner
at all. This puzzled him as well. A prisoner, after all, could not
expect to be treated very well. True, he and Dugald were nobles, but
this could not possibly mean anything to persons as uncivilized as
mountain tribesmen.

Yet somehow, the only thing that was done was that all of them; the
tribesmen, The Barbarian, Myka, Dugald and he--made their way to
Weatherby's home. A number of the tribesmen continued on their way from
there, going to their own homes to bring their families to watch the
test. The remainder stayed behind to post guard. Dugald was put in one
room, and Geoffrey in another. The Barbarian and Myka went off somewhere
with Weatherby--presumably to have breakfast. Geoffrey could smell food
cooking, somewhere toward the back of the house. The smell sat
intolerably on his empty stomach.

He sat for perhaps a half hour in the room, which was almost bare of
furniture. There was a straight-backed chair, in which he sat, a narrow
bed, and a bureau. Even though his hands were still tied behind his
back, he did his best to search the room for something to help
him--though he had no idea of what he would do next after he managed to
escape from the room itself.

The problem did not arise, because the room had been stripped of
anything with a sharp edge on which to cut his lashings, and of anything
else he might put to use. These people had obviously held prisoners here
before. He sat back down in his chair, and stared at the wall.

Eventually, someone opened the door. Geoffrey looked over, and saw that
it was The Barbarian. He looked at the inlander coldly, but The
Barbarian did not seem to notice. He sat down on the edge of the bed.

"On top of everything else," he began without preamble, "I've just
finished a hearty breakfast. That ought to really make you mad at me."

"I'm not concerned with you, or your meals," Geoffrey pointed out.

The Barbarian's eyes twinkled. "It doesn't bother you, my getting your
help and then not protecting you from these intransigent tribesmen?"

"Hardly. I'd be a fool to expect it."

"Would you, now? Look, bucko--these people live a hard way of life.
Living on a mountain is a good way not to live comfortably. But it's a
good way of living your own way, _if_ you can stand the gaff. These
people can. Every one of them. They've got their marks to prove it.
Every last one of them has fought it out face to face with another man,
and proved his fitness to take up space in this territory. See--it's a
social code. And they'll extend it to cover any stranger who doesn't get
killed on his way here. If you can get your mark, you're welcome here
for the rest of your life. They keep their clan stock fresh and vigorous
that way. And it all has the virtue of being a uniform, just, rigid code
that covers every man in the group. These barbarian cultures aren't ever
happy without a good code to their name, you know."

"Yours seems to lack one."

The Barbarian chuckled. "Oh, no. We've got one, all right, or you'd
never have had me to worry you. Nothing we like better than a good,
talented enemy. You know, these people here in the mountains used to be
our favorite enemies. But so many of us wound up getting our marks, it
just got to be futile. Once you're in, you know, you're a full-fledged
clan member. That sort of divided our loyalties. The problem just seemed
to solve itself, though. We understand them, they understand us, we
trade back and forth ... hell, it's all one family."

Geoffrey frowned. "You mean--they got those rifles from you?"

"Sure. We're full of ingenuity--for barbarians, that is. Not in the same
class with you seaboard nobles, of course, but we poke along." The
Barbarian stood up, and his expression turned serious. "Look, son--you
remember that knife of mine you borrowed for a while? I'll have to lend
it to you again, in about twenty minutes. Your friend Dugald's going to
have one just like it, and your left arms are going to be tied together
at the wrists. I hope you remember what I happened to tell you about how
to use it, because under the rules of the code, I'm not allowed to
instruct you."

And Geoffrey was left alone.

       *       *       *

There was a hard-packed area of dirt in front of Weatherby's home, and
now its edges were crowded with tribesmen, many of whom had brought
their women and children. Weatherby, together with a spare,
capable-looking woman, and with The Barbarian and Myka, sat on his
porch. One of the tribesmen was wrapping Geoffrey's and Dugald's
forearms together. Geoffrey watched him with complete detachment. He
stole a glance over toward Weatherby's porch, and it seemed to him that
Myka was tense and anxious. He couldn't be sure....

The fingers of his right hand gripped the haft of The Barbarian's knife.
He held it with his thumb along the blade, knowing that if he drew his
arm up, to stab downward, or back, to slash, Dugald would have a perfect
opening. It was his thought, remembering that razor-keen blade, that he
ought to be able to do plenty of damage with a simple underhand twist of
his arm. He did not look down to see how Dugald was holding the knife
he'd been given. That would have been unfair.

The crowd of watching tribesmen was completely silent. This was a
serious business with them, Geoffrey reflected.

The tribesman tying their wrists had finished the job. He stepped back.
"Anytime after I say 'Go,' you boys set to it. Anything goes and dead
man loses. If you don't fight, we kill you both."

For the first time since their capture, Geoffrey looked squarely into
Dugald's slit eyes. "I'm sorry we have to do this to each other in this
way, Dugald," he said.

"Go!" the tribesman shouted, and jumped back.

Dugald spat at Geoffrey's face. Geoffrey twitched his head
involuntarily, realized what he'd done, and threw himself off his feet,
pulling Dugald with him and just escaping the downward arc of Dugald's
plunging knife. The momentum of Dugald's swing, combined with Geoffrey's
weight, pulled him completely over Geoffrey's shoulder. The two of them
jerked abruptly flat on the ground, their shoulders wrenched, sprawled
out facing each other and tied together like two cats on a string.

The crowd shouted.

Geoffrey had landed full on his ribs, and for a moment he saw nothing
but a red mist. Then his eyes cleared and he was staring into Dugald's
face. Dugald snarled at him, and pawed out with his knife, at the
advantage now because he could stab downward. Geoffrey rolled, and
Dugald perforce rolled with him. The stab missed again, and Geoffrey, on
his back, jabbed blindly over his head and reached nothing. Then they
were on their stomachs again.

Dugald was panting, his face running wet. The long black hair was full
of dust, and his face was smeared. If ever Geoffrey had seen a man in an
animal state, that was what Dugald resembled. Geoffrey thought wildly;
Is this what a _noble_ is?

"I'll kill you!" Dugald bayed at him, and Geoffrey's hackles rose. This
is not a man, he thought. This is nothing that deserves to live.

Dugald's arm snapped back, knife poised, and drove downward again.
Geoffrey suddenly coiled his back muscles and heaved on his left arm,
yanking himself up against Dugald's chest. He snapped his hips sideward,
and Dugald's knife missed him completely for the third and fatal time.
The Barbarian's knife slipped upward into Dugald's rib cage, and
suddenly Geoffrey was drenched with blood. Dugald's teeth bit into his
neck, but the other man's jaws were already slackening. Geoffrey let
himself slump, and hoped they would cut this carrion away from him as
soon as possible. He heard the crowd yelping, and felt The Barbarian
plucking the knife out of his hand. His arm was freed, and he rolled
away.

"By God, I _knew_ you had the stuff," The Barbarian was booming. "I knew
they had to start breeding men out on the coast sooner or later.
Here--give me your other wrist." The blade burned his skin twice each
way--once for victory and once for special aptitude--and then Myka
pressed a cloth to the wound.

She was shaking her head. "I've never seen it done better. You're a
natural born fighter, lad. I've got one of my sisters all picked out for
you."

Geoffrey smiled up at The Barbarian, a little ruefully. "It seems you
and I'll be going back to the coast together, next year."

"Had it in mind all along, lad," The Barbarian said. "If I can't lick
'em, I'll be damned if I won't make 'em join me."

"It's an effective system," Geoffrey said.

"That it is, lad. That it is. And now, if you'll climb up to your feet,
let's go get you some breakfast."

                                                                   END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ February
    1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Barbarians, by John Sentry

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BARBARIANS ***

***** This file should be named 30828.txt or 30828.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/2/30828/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
